   
                     FREE SOFTWARE LEADERS STAND TOGETHER
                          自由軟體眾領導者聯合聲明

   The Craig Mundie speech is old news by now, so hopefully this is the
   last word. A number of the free software evangelists, in informal
   discussion, felt that the proper response to Microsoft would be to
   stand together. Mundie's speech shows that Microsoft's strategy is to
   keep us divided and attack us one at a time, until all are gone. Thus,
   their emphasis on the GPL this time. While we didn't try to represent
   every group and project, many major voices of Open Source and Free
   Software have signed this message. We took a while, because we're not
   used to this, but we'll be better next time. So, please note the
   signatures at the bottom of this message - we will stand together, and
   defend each other.

   Craig Mundie 的演說現在已經是舊聞了﹐所以也許這是最後的回應。在非正式 
   的討論之後﹐一群自由軟體狂熱者覺得該是大家一起發表正式聲明的時候了    
   。Mundie 的演說已經顯示出微軟的策略就是要分化我們並且各個擊破﹐這就是
   為什麼現在他們的目標集中在 GPL 上。我們並不想要代表每個計劃與團體﹐不
   過幾位開放原碼與自由軟體的代言者已經簽署了這一份聲明。我們以前是不太這
   麼做的﹐也因此多花了一些時間﹐不過下次我們會作得更好。請注意本聲明下方
   的簽名 - 我們將會站在同一個戰線﹐並且互相支援。

     Bruce Perens

   We note a new triumph for Open Source and Free Software: we have
   become so serious a competitor to Microsoft that their executives
   publicly announce their fear. However, the only threat that we present
   to Microsoft is the end of monopoly practices. Microsoft is welcome to
   participate as an equal partner, a role held today by entities ranging
   from individuals to transnational corporations like IBM and HP.
   Equality, however, isn't what Microsoft is looking for. Thus, they
   have announced Shared Source, a system that could be summarized as
   Look but don't touch - and we control everything.

   我們注意到開放原碼與自由軟體的一項勝利: 我們已經變成了一個微軟不可忽略
   的對手﹐他們的高層已經公開地表示出他們的恐懼。儘管如此﹐我們唯一展現在
   微軟面前的威脅﹐就是壟斷經營這件事已經到了盡頭。歡迎微軟成為與我們對等
   的伙伴﹐一個從個人到如 IBM 與 HP 等跨國企業已經投身的角色﹐然而微軟要
   求的顯然不是對等這件事。因此他們提出了所謂的 Shared Source﹐一個可以這
   樣描述的系統 : 可遠觀而不可褻玩 - 而且 *我們* 掌控著所有的東西。

   Microsoft deceptively compares Open Source to failed dot-com business
   models. Perhaps they misunderstand the term Free Software. Remember
   that Free refers to liberty, not price. The dot-coms gave away goods
   and services as loss-leaders, in unsuccessful efforts to build their
   market share. In contrast, the business model of Open Source is to
   reduce the cost of software development and maintenance by
   distributing it among many collaborators.

   微軟將開放原碼與失敗的 dot-com 事業作誤導性的比較﹐也許他們誤解了 Free
   Software 的意義。請記得 Free 代表的是自由﹐而不是免費。dot-com 公司以
   敗家子的方式散出產品與服務﹐徒勞無功地建立起他們的市場佔有率。相反的﹐
   開放原碼的商業模式﹐卻是以將軟體散布在各個合作人員之間的方式﹐來降低軟
   體開發與維護的費用。

   The success of the Open Source model arises from copyright holders
   relaxing their control in exchange for more and better collaboration.
   Developers allow their software to be freely redistributed and
   modified, asking only for the same privileges in return.

   開放原始碼模式的成功之處﹐在於版權持有人釋放了他們所擁有的控制權﹐並且
   藉以換得更多更好的團隊合作發展。發展人員允許他們的軟體能夠自由地重新散
   布與修改﹐僅僅要求相同對等的回饋。

   There is much software that is essential to a business, but which does
   not differentiate that business from its competitors. Even companies
   that have not fully embraced the Open Source model can justify
   collaboration on Free Software projects for this non-differentiating
   software, because of the money they will save. And such collaborations
   are often overwhelmingly successful: for example, the project that
   produces the market-leading Apache web server was started by a group
   of users who agreed to share the work of maintaining a piece of
   software that each of their businesses depended on.

   對於商業公司來說﹐有許多軟體是非常必要的﹐但是並不是這些軟體有權利可以
   讓其競爭對手無法擁有商機。就算是那些不完全擁抱開放原始碼模式的公司﹐也
   可以藉由那些不造成壟斷商機的軟體而擁有了團隊合作發展的機會。因為他們已
   經能夠將花費給節省下來。像這樣的合作經常獲得全面性的成功: 舉例來說﹐像
   是市場領導品牌的 Apache 伺服器計劃﹐就是因為一群使用者要共同維護一個他
   們的公司都需要的軟體﹐並互相分享彼此的成果而開始的。

   The efficiency of this cooperation is in the best interests of the
   user. But Free Software is also directly in the user's interest,
   because it means that the users control the software they use. When
   they do business with Open Source vendors, the vendors do not dominate
   them.

   這樣的合作而產生的效率﹐對使用者是最有利的﹐但是自由軟體也能夠直接照顧
   到使用者的利益﹐因為使用者現在可以控制他們使用的軟體的品質了。當他們與
   開放原始碼廠商作生意時﹐這些廠商並不會全然控制他們。

   With very little funding, the GNU/Linux system has become a
   significant player in many major markets, from Internet servers to
   embedded devices. Our GUI desktop projects have astounded the software
   industry by going from zero to being comparable with or superior to
   others in only 4 years. Workstation manufacturers like Sun and HP have
   selected our desktops to replace their own consortium projects,
   because our work was better. An entire industry has been built around
   Free Software, and is growing rapidly despite an unfavorable market.
   The success of software companies like Red Hat, and the benefits to
   vendors such as Dell and IBM, demonstrate that Free Software is not at
   all incompatible with business.

   藉由極為少量的基金﹐GNU/Linux 系統在許多的市場中已經成為一個令人注目的
   角色﹐從網際網路伺服器到嵌入式系統皆然。我們的 GUI 桌面環境計畫﹐ 從完
   全沒有﹐到現在可以與其它產品相比﹐甚至還要更好﹐只花了短短的 4 年﹐這 
   已經震驚了軟體工業。像 Sun 與 HP 等工作站廠商﹐選擇我們的桌面環境﹐來 
   取代他們自己合作方案﹐只因為我們的東西更好。儘管市場的表現對自由軟體來
   說並不盡如人意﹐然而藉由自由軟體的充斥﹐整體的產業環境儼然成形﹐並正迅
   速地成長中。 如 Red Hat 軟體公司的成功﹐以及像 Dell 與 IBM 等從中獲得
   的助益﹐在在都顯示了自由軟體並不是完全不相容於商業活動的。

   The Free Software license singled out for abuse by Microsoft is the
   GNU General Public License, or GNU GPL. This license is the computer
   equivalent of share and share alike. But this does not mean, as
   Microsoft claims, that a company using these programs is legally
   obliged to make all its software and data free. We make all GPL
   software available in source form for incorporation as a building
   block in new programs. This is the secret of how we have been able to
   create so much good software, so quickly.

   微軟所單挑並詆毀的自由軟體授權﹐就是 GNU 通用公共授權 (GNU General
   Public License)﹐或稱 GNU GPL。這份版權聲明正好符合電腦的發展原則﹐是
   經由一次又一次﹐彼此相互不斷地共享而來的。但是它並不像微軟所宣稱的﹐只
   要一間公司使用這些程式﹐就必須依法公開它所有的軟體與資料。我們讓所有的
   GPL 軟體以原始碼的形式讓大家可以取得並使用﹐它就像是基礎材料一樣地可以
   在新程式內被使用。這就是我們怎麼能夠作出這麼多好軟體﹐不只多﹐而且快的
   祕密。

   If you do choose to incorporate GPL code into a program, you will be
   required to make the entire program Free Software. This is a fair
   exchange of our code for yours, and one that will continue as you reap
   the benefit of improvements contributed by the community. However, the
   legal requirements of the GPL apply only to programs which incorporate
   some of the GPL-covered code - not to other programs on the same
   system, and not to the data files that the programs operate upon.

   如果你真的選擇了在一個程式中使用了 GPL 的程式碼﹐整個程式都會被要求成 
   為自由軟體。對我們的程式碼而言﹐這樣要求你的程式碼是很公平的回饋﹐而且
   在你獲得社群的貢獻回饋的同時﹐這樣的機制還會繼續下去。然而﹐GPL 的要求
   僅僅限於那些被併入具 GPL 授權的程式碼的程式 - 這並不包括同樣系統上的其
   它程式﹐還有這些程式所使用的資料也不算在內。

   Although Microsoft raises the issue of GPL violations, that is a
   classic red herring. Many more people find themselves in violation of
   Microsoft licenses, because Microsoft doesn't allow copying,
   modification, and redistribution as the GPL does. Microsoft license
   violations have resulted in civil suits and imprisonment. Accidental
   GPL violations are easily remedied, and rarely get to court.

   儘管微軟提出了違反 GPL 的爭議﹐但是那卻是很無關緊要的事。更多的人會發 
   現他們違反了微軟的授權﹐因為微軟不准 GPL 所允許的複製﹐修改﹐以及再散
   佈的行為。違反了微軟的授權就會吃上官司﹐甚至遭判刑﹐但無意間的違反 GPL
   授權卻很容易做出修正或是補救措施﹐很少有鬧上法庭的事情。

   It's the share and share alike feature of the GPL that intimidates
   Microsoft, because it defeats their Embrace and Extend strategy.
   Microsoft tries to retain control of the market by taking the result
   of open projects and standards, and adding incompatible Microsoft-only
   features in closed-source. Adding an incompatible feature to a server,
   for example, then requires a similarly-incompatible client, which
   forces users to "upgrade". Microsoft uses this
   deliberate-incompatibility strategy to force its way through the
   marketplace. But if Microsoft were to attempt to "embrace and extend"
   GPL software, they would be required to make each incompatible
   "enhancement" public and available to its competitors. Thus, the GPL
   threatens the strategy that Microsoft uses to maintain its monopoly.

   就是 GPL 的 share and share alike 的特性﹐讓微軟感到害怕﹐因為它擊敗了
   他們的 Embrace and Extend (擁抱並擴充) 的策略。微軟以取得開放計劃與標
   準的成果﹐然後以封閉程式碼的形式加上不相容的微軟獨家功能﹐來嚐試著取得
   市場的控制權。舉例來說﹐伺服器加上了不相容的功能﹐就需要功能相似但不相
   容 的用戶端程式﹐如此就可以強迫用戶進行 "昇級"。微軟利用這種故意加上不
   相容性的策略﹐來在市場上取得一席之地。但是如果微軟想要 "擁抱並擴充"   
   GPL 軟體的話﹐他們就必需要公開每個不相容的 "功能加強" 程式碼給其競爭者
   。如此一來﹐GPL 就威脅到微軟用以維持其獨大的一貫策略了。

   Microsoft claims that Free Software fosters incompatible "code
   forking", but Microsoft is the real motor of incompatibility: they
   deliberately make new versions incompatible with old ones, to force
   users to purchase each upgrade. How many times have users had to
   upgrade Office because the Word file format changed? Microsoft claims
   that our software is insecure, but security experts say you shouldn't
   trust anything but Free Software for critical security functions. It
   is Microsoft's programs that are known for snooping on users,
   vulnerability to viruses, and the possibility of hidden "back doors".

   微軟宣稱自由軟體會衍生不相容程式碼﹐但是微軟才是不相容的真正始作俑者。
   他們刻意讓新版無法相容於舊版﹐迫使消費者不得不做升級。有多少次使用者必
   須昇級 Office﹐只因為 Word 檔案格式的改變 ? 微軟宣稱我們的程式不安全﹐
   但是安全專家說﹐在極度重要的安全功能上﹐除了自由軟體外﹐你不應該信任其
   它的軟體。微軟的程式可一直是以能夠窺視使用者資料﹐易於感染病毒﹐和可能
   藏有 "後門" 聞名的。

   Microsoft's Shared Source program recognizes that there are many
   benefits to the openness, community involvement, and innovation of the
   Open Source model. But the most important component of that model, the
   one that makes all of the others work, is freedom. By attacking the
   one license that is specifically designed to fend off their customer
   and developer lock-in strategy, they hope to get the benefits of Free
   Software without sharing those benefits with those who participate in
   creating them.

   微軟的 Shared Source 計劃已經體認到一個開放的社群參與﹐以及開放原始碼
   模式的創新可以帶來許多好處。但是該模式中最重要的一個項目﹐也是讓所有其
   它項目能夠運作的﹐就是自由。藉由攻擊一個能夠抵擋他們綁住用戶與開發人員
   的策略的授權﹐他們希望能夠得到自由軟體的好處﹐而不必與參與創造它們的人
   一同分享成果。

   We urge Microsoft to go the rest of the way in embracing the Open
   Source software development paradigm. Stop asking for one-way sharing,
   and accept the responsibility to share and share alike that comes with
   the benefits of Open Source. Acknowledge that it is compatible with
   business.

   我們督促微軟能夠在未來擁抱開放原碼的軟體發展典範。不要再要求單向的分享
   ﹐在得到開放原碼的助益的同時﹐負起 share and share alike 的責任。承認
   它是可與商業並存的。

   Free Software is a great way to build a common foundation of software
   that encourages innovation and fair competition. Microsoft, it's time
   for you to join us.

   自由軟體是建構軟體的共同基礎的好方法﹐這些基礎可鼓勵創新與公平競爭。微
   軟﹐該是你加入我們的時候了。

     Bruce Perens, Primary Author: The Open Source Definition

     co-signers:

     Richard Stallman, Free Software Foundation.
     Eric Raymond, Open Source Initiative.
     Linus Torvalds, Creator of the Linux Kernel.
     Miguel de Icaza, GNOME GUI Desktop Project.
     Larry Wall, Creator of the Perl Language.
     Guido van Rossum, Creator of the Python Language.
     Tim O'Reilly, Publisher.
     Bob Young, Co-Founder, Red Hat
     Larry Augustin, CEO, VA Linux Systems
     _________________________________________________________________

   A master copy of this document can be found at
   http://perens.com/Articles/StandTogether.html You may copy and
   reproduce this document with the formatting changes and translation
   necessary for your publication, but please don't change what we say.
   See perens.com for press contact information. Thanks to Dave Edwards
   for his work on putting this document together.
